ever wanted to know the absolute
surefire way to find a sucker and remove
it keep watching this video because I'm
going to tell you the 100% success rate
way to always get the sucker
tomatoes welcome back to another
nature's always right episode today
we're going to be talking about pruning
our Tomatoes and I'm going to show you
how to prune them from their baby stage
all the way up to adult plants like this
that are producing fruit so the next
step before planting we need to prep
these transplants what we want to do is
to take off about half of the vegetation
on the plant and I want to leave three
to four layers on the vine here the way
I'm running my Tomatoes is a central
leader a single leader I'm going to take
it down to three initial layers here so
one two three and then here's even the
fourth layer sometimes when you pinch it
it'll tear the skin and make a rip which
makes the plant have to heal that wound
area and it's wasting energy on that
it's also a site where an infection
could get in damaging the plant maybe
even losing it so just trying to you
know keep the plant as healthy as
possible from the beginning here
snipping them is a little bit safer
alright and then I'm just leaving one
two and three tears the fourth tier is
here but I'm gonna leave it my tomatoes
right if they were taller I can get a
little more aggressive with this I want
to make sure that when I'm looking at
the plant it's got at least three main
fan leaves here these are the Sun
collecting leaves they're gonna help
produce more photosynthesis create more
roots get the plant bigger so I'm
pruning the Amish paste right now and I
need to prune these up so that looks
something more like this and you can see
on this one I taken off about half of
the leaves and the suckers the reason
I'm doing this is to promote more root
growth and when I bury this in the
ground I'm going to bury it up to this
node right here and if you can see these
hairs these are places where roots will
most likely pop out of and they'll pop
out of these nodes as well and it'll
just create a lot more root structure
for the plant giving it more access to
water and nutrients
you know a more vigorous fruit structure
the better the the plant will be the
stronger it will be so that's what we're
trying to encourage here I'm also
looking for any suckers if there's any
larger suckers I'm gonna take those out
right now as well a sucker is a
competing vine that tries to come off
with a central leader and it will
actually flower and produce fruit as
well you know there's so many different
techniques and ways that people grow
tomatoes so I'm just showing the way
that I do it and obviously I'm still
learning still trying to dial in my
methods and I'm trying different
techniques here and there to see what
works best and I found that this this
idea of trying to create more root
structure in the beginning is a really
beneficial thing to do so I just want to
show you guys something really fun that
kind of proves and just shows how
amazing nature is and just kind of my
whole philosophy that nature is always
right and that you know these natural
patterns are designed and they're here
for us to use so check this out guys so
this is called the Fibonacci spiral so
check this out so here's my lower branch
my lowest branch is right here take that
off
spin it to the left the next branch that
I come across is a little bit higher I
keep spinning
the next branch I come across was a
little bit higher I keep spinning it the
next branch I come across it's a little
bit higher and so on and that is an
example of a spiral pattern it's
layering itself going higher and higher
as it goes around the spiral and can you
think of any other pattern that is like
a helical spiral pattern well DNA is
like that that's the main one I think of
and trees also mimic the same pattern
the same packet if that packing
efficiency and basically just all it
does is allows for the most balanced
amount of light to hit all around the
entire circumference anyway it's just a
cool observation of a natural pattern
and how amazing that is so I'm gonna
prep all my tomatoes so that they're
ready to go
later this afternoon when I plant them I
want to plant them once the weather's a
lot cooler
it's about 83 degrees today and full Sun
so I wouldn't want to plant these midday
they'd get wilted it would just stunt
them and give them a lot more stress
some of the tomatoes might not even make
it so it's best to plant either early
morning or late afternoon first tomatoes
we're gonna check out are these
chocolate cherries and every tomato
variety is a little different they all
grow slightly differently these guys are
pretty cool because they have double
flower fruit sets so when you see the
fruit set it'll cut it'll split and go
into two which is pretty cool let's
check out another tomato so this is the
Amish paste and most Tomatoes will just
put off one flower set off of the main
stem like that here we can see the fruit
developed it's coming off one fruiting
cluster so anyways the chocolate
cherries are very productive very
delicious I definitely would recommend
trying to grow them so when you're
pruning tomatoes and cucumbers and even
fruit trees I really recommend starting
to prune and analyze the plant from the
bottom up and that's just gonna help you
to give the plant the best shape and
ensure that you're finding all the
suckers or anything you need to remove
since these plants are already really
established it's the end of June and I
put these in at the beginning of May I
believe so they're super established
I've been harvesting fruit off them now
so most of the suckers have already been
removed because we've done a really good
job occasionally another sucker will pop
up in a crock but so you can just do a
quick check of the places you've already
gone to and move your way up so first
thing I'll check for just to show you
guys is suckers but I'll I'll prune off
Sun leaves and sucker gonna do it all at
the same time but I'll show you guys in
steps and then we'll put it all together
at the end and a final process so first
what are suckers and you know let's find
some one thing to keep in mind we are
pruning these tomatoes to a single
leader this is the technique that I'm
using some people that they're suckers
go wild some people trade a single
leader some people do double leader
which is pretty cool but for myself I'm
doing single leader and single leader
means that you're keeping the mains
being the main fruiting part of the
plant for its entire life
the single leader has the the best
connection down to the root structure
you start letting the suckers go off now
your snow you're splitting the energy of
that plant up and a sucker can produce
fruit it is gonna take off a lot of
energy from the root structure and it's
gonna start putting it into another
secondary growth now if you're doing a
two-tiered structure then you want that
but since we're doing single leader it's
gonna be a waste of our energy we won't
get as much fruit production if we let
it a random sucker go and don't train it
we really want to remove all of those so
you can think of the sucker the reason
we call it sucker is because it's
tricking you into believing that it is
the main growth stem but it's not okay
so as you saw on the young plants I
showed off the Sun leaf right a Sun leaf
they have leaves that look like this
there's no flowers on them and they come
off the side of the main stem so if we
come up a plant here here's a flower
section fruiting section and if we
follow the main stem the next fruiting
section there it is it comes off the
main stem boom next flower sections here
comes off the main stem keep going up
another fruiting section comes off the
main stem so right now we know these are
Sun leaves this is what a fruiting
cluster looks like okay so the next
thing we need to look in the crotch the
crotch ninety percent of the time the
sucker is going to be in a crotch okay
the crotch is just where the main stem
and the Sun leaf meet and creates
usually a 90-degree angle somewhere on
that and in the middle the sucker will
grow out so I've pulled all these off as
we go up the plant now looks like we've
got some stuff going on here so on this
variety it likes to put off Sun leaves
and the actual sucker off of the crotch
some varieties will do that and you
should be able to identify the
difference between a sucker and a Sun
leaf by the shape
I'm showing you guys a little bit more
advanced stuff if you really want to
understand suckers and what they look
like and what they are and to get them a
hundred percent of time even when
they're not in the ideal crotch location
then you got to understand the lease
identification so see how these are much
more broad and wide
that's a Sun leaf this one here the
leaves are more narrow some more smaller
leaves curled up on the inside and that
is the sucker and what's gonna actually
happen with this as this grows bigger
and stretches this should will become a
Sun leaf this little piece will become
the leader of the sucker and this thing
will stretch up and will produce fruit
just like this one will so if you could
imagine it this little suckers gonna
stretch up just like this guy and
eventually it'll shoot off flowers like
this but we know this is a sucker it's
growing in the crotch a rule that you
always want to keep and play when you
are removing suckers so say you identify
one you think that's a sucker okay well
I'd yeah I'm pretty sure but don't pull
it off yet look up double-check that
that is for sure the sucker and there is
for sure the next leader okay that's
gonna really prevent you from making a
big mistake so as we can see there is
another leader up here and I just want
to show you guys that plug tomato plants
will develop a little bit strange it
does not hold a consistent pattern so
don't hold a consistent pattern in your
mind you need to know each individual
leaf and that's what's gonna tell you
what's the sucker or not so as we know
I've pointed out that these are suckers
right so we're gonna pull these xtrasun
leaves off - I just I don't like them
growing in there it just reduces air
flow and they don't really help
photosynthesis very much anyways so now
we know this is the leader right so
let's keep moving up and here's the
fruiting cluster so here's my big secret
on how to determine whether or not this
is a leader or not so if you're looking
up the central stem here you see flower
structure coming off the main stem now a
sucker will always be so far behind the
central leader it won't
have this flowering structure coming off
the main stem yet but if we were to let
this sucker that I had here let it grow
eventually that little stem I showed
will stretch up out out to here and it's
gonna shoot off a flower cluster just
like this one but when we're trying to
identify we want to go up and see that
nick's flower structure that proves to
me this is the main eater so let's keep
going
this variety shoots off a Sun leaf off
the crotch of the flower cluster this is
not a sucker and I know that because
it's got broad leaves and the broad
leaves keep going down they don't have
that little vertically shooting frilly
leaf that is normally right there for
the sucker so I don't really like these
leaves that much I'm just removing them
okay let's keep going up
okay now this plants getting weird right
so it looks like we've got two crotches
and then the actual main leaders coming
out of the center of that crotch so what
can become confusing you you're thinking
crotch the suckers always in the crotch
well that's not the best rule to go by
because that's not always true sometimes
the actual leader is in the crotch and
that is where it causes people problems
sometimes so that's why I'm going to
show you guys a couple more examples of
this so here we go so let's identify our
main leader right so we've got son
leaves coming off the sides here here
we've got leaves here coming out of a
crotch on each side and then a central
stem coming up now let's think about my
flower thing I just mentioned the main
leader will always have the flower
structure coming off of a stem and that
has that doesn't that okay if it's the
case that this is the leader then I
should be able to find the NIT the
central leader right here and this is it
this right here is the leader this is
what's gonna stretch up and become the
next growth of the plant this will
become the next Sun leaf so let's remove
these suckers
there and there's one more right there
just be very very gentle at the top of
the plant you can snap it okay so now
we've ensured we've removed all the
suckers here's the next central leader
it's gonna continue on now the mixed up
I would train this to the line but I'm
gonna show you guys that in a separate
video okay we're gonna prune another one
but let's just take a quick look at the
way these plants will work so about
every foot or so you will have fruiting
cluster Sun leaf Sun leaf fruiting
cluster so it's you know there's a
pattern that it actually creates
fruiting cluster a couple Sun leaves and
then another fruiting cluster and it
just it's in these sections so it the
plant is created in these big chunks so
that's another way that you can think
about the plant okay guys here's our
next tomato and I'm just gonna zoom up
to the top for our example
okay so let's analyze the plant so all
the way down we don't have suckers I'm
just coming up here to show you a couple
sucker places so let's come up when
we're looking at this this leaf what's
this leaf it's got broad leaves there's
no flowers it's a Sun leaf let's go up
to the next sleep branch this one as
well right that's a Sun leaf what's the
next highest branch okay
well this one's on the crotch it you see
how it's not perfectly in the crotch so
that will happen a lot so just know that
suckers don't always grow perfectly in
the cross you can kind of come slightly
up as well so let's make sure this is a
sucker right let's take a look at it
well it's got a Sun leaf a Sun leaf and
then what's this thing got something
more special coming off of the center
here this whole branch in here is a
sucker but this will can become another
leader this can become a part of the
plant that produces fruit okay so we
don't want that now let's use my
technique of double checking right so
let's go up the plant we've got a
fruiting cluster and isn't that our our
100% indicator we've got a fruiting
cluster coming off of the main stem
that's higher than the sucker okay so
this has to be the leader
let's keep going though let's double
check keep going up son Leif there's a
suddenly son Leif and here we go
here's the leader son Leif son Leif and
we even have more evidence because
there's another fruiting cluster right
here all we really needed to identify
the leader was this main fruiting
cluster coming off of the main stem okay
you can see the sucker has not even
started to develop its flowers yet it's
about you in the next day or so this
this sucker will start putting off some
flowers but it doesn't matter because
when you go back up the plant and you
see this main cluster coming off the
main stem you know that's the leader for
example if you let this sucker grow for
another week or so it is gonna shoot off
flowers just like this main stem but the
way you'll know it's the sucker is
because this fruit has already probably
started developing or it's much further
along this will just have its flowers
first developing plus it's also in a
crotch and that's the guarantee that it
is a sucker okay so if you got bigger
suckers it's good to clip them just to
prevent any stripping sometimes the skin
of the tomato will tear so you want to
prevent that so cutting that off always
throw away all your cuttings from
cucumbers squash and tomatoes and throw
them away or compost them if you're
composting them at high heat and that's
gonna prevent any disease spreading
because tomato cucumber and squash Liam
can carry a lot of disease and spread
them easily okay so now this guy's done
there's nothing else to really remove
you know when I get to the top here this
is a sucker coming out of that crotch a
lot of times I'll even leave that little
one just in case just to be sure
sometimes the top leader you know
occasionally you'll get a random disease
or you'll get a grasshopper or something
will come in here and chew that off and
break it and kill it which means the
only way this plants going to have new
growth is out of a sucker
so sometimes leaving the small sucker
like this even though I could remove it
is a good idea because sometimes
something goes wrong with
plant and it's good to have a little bit
of a backup so you can keep that in mind
as well ok so here we have a rare
situation but it does happen on tomato
plants occasionally and that's where
you'll get a sucker and the leader
looking almost identical and that's
because it's not growing directly out of
the crotch and that's what's so
confusing about it so let's take a look
at this and I'll show you the single
determining factor that will always tell
you if you're dealing with the leader or
not ok so here we have the main stem and
then it's branching off into two
individual stems ok obviously both of
these are growth points either these
could produce fruit they both have
flowers they're both about the same
point along in their development but
what is the one difference between these
two that is that this one has a flower
set coming off of the main stem and only
a leader will have a flower set coming
off of the main stem and the beginning
stages of its growth you'll notice that
the the sucker here does not have any
flowers coming off of a main stem it
only has flowers coming off of its next
leader
the next growth point for this sucker is
right here and that's going to if I let
it grow it will continue to grow up and
eventually this flower set right here
will actually it's when it stretches out
it will be on them on the stem just as
this one is but in the beginning stages
only the true leader the one that has
direct connection to the roots and the
ground will have the flower set coming
off of the main stem so that's how you
can always always know ok here's the
third and final example I'll show you
and this is a great one because this is
a really developed sucker that we missed
that's going really long and it proves
my method of finding the true central
leader so I'll try to show you guys it's
hard to film this but let's just go up
the plant together here so we're coming
up coming up coming up
what do you guys see right there it is
so this is a Sun leaf coming down this
is the central leader something's in the
crotch
it is a sucker so as we come up you'll
notice there's no flower cluster coming
off of the stem at all
here's another sucker coming off of the
sucker and the crotch there there's
another sucker here coming out of the
crotch another sucker coming off the
sucker and then it finally has its
fruiting cluster up here so let's double
check is this the leader could it be
well let's go back down and let's come
up the plant we're coming up we're
coming up we're coming up look at this
it's a gigantic fruiting cluster so
obviously this is the leader so I just
want to show you guys that even though
we missed this sucker and it's crazy
developed there's no flower cluster
coming off the main stem yet still so my
little method of looking for the flower
crust
cluster coming off of the main stem this
is the 100% way to always know okay now
you know obviously looking in the crotch
is great that's a great way to look it's
a great thing to do
okay so let's so this one's a big one
right so I'll just clip it and then if
you guys can see this Sun leaf it was
connected to is looking a little
unhealthy and gross I'm just going to
remove that so the next part that we're
going to move to is pruning them
removing dead leaves or leaves that are
just not functioning anymore or not
photosynthesizing well they're not
getting enough Sun and we're gonna do
that to increase sunlight and increase
airflow amongst the tomatoes so let's
just check that out next because we're
doing lower and lean here with a single
leader
we're pruning pretty aggressively Curtis
Stone calls it hard pruning what that
what they mean when they say hard
pruning is just you're removing all of
the leaves as the plants moving up and
growing so as you can see here it's all
bare stem we've got two fruiting
clusters and then as we move up the
plant we've got more leaves and we may
want to remove
more of them so things I'm considering
here airflow and light and how much
shade it's casting so the Sun is gonna
come from this direction and come over
top like this going east to west what is
it going to shade out as that happens is
it are some of these leaves not even
gonna receive much Sun like possibly
this one because it's being shaded out
by the leaves on top of it it's not
receiving Sun it has more potential to
get powdery mildew or a fungus it's
gonna reduce airflow it also I've got
basal interplanted in here maybe
blocking some sunlight to the basal so
these are the kind of things I'm
considering usually every time we prune
we're taking off a couple Sun leaves now
if you're growing heirlooms and tomatoes
that take longer to develop and that are
larger in you and you're not in a
greenhouse with some shade cloth on it
and it's exposed to open Sun you can get
tomato sunburn with larger Tomatoes
having some leaves that kind of cover up
and shade out the tomato can help it so
I wouldn't hard prune a beefsteak tomato
as hard as I would cherries because
these ripen and you pull them much
quicker they don't get sunburned really
that was another reason actually for me
going with full cherries since I do grow
out in the Sun and it's the hot Southern
California Sun last year when I did beef
steaks and some other heirloom large
heirlooms a lot of them did get
sunburned so that's why I shifted more
towards of this but anyways back to the
pruning that's gonna be good enough for
me now this plant here is gonna provide
a little bit of shade onto the fruit and
then now more lights gonna be able to
penetrate in here and get the basil and
everything okay this plant looks really
good there's nothing diseased on it if
there's some gross leaves I'd remove
those and we'll be harvesting this fruit
here in another week or two it'll be all
be gone and we'll keep moving up the
plant and also pruning encourages growth
upwards so as we trim the leaves down
here it's helping to stimulate growth at
the top of the plant to put out and keep
growing up
last example I'm gonna try to just take
you through my all my steps putting it
all together from top to bottom here so
here's the bottom of the plant when
you're starting moving up as you can see
this plant is directly underneath the
plant above it so these leaves are
getting shaded out and I can even see a
little bit of mildew on these okay so
I'm even seeing a little bit of powdery
mildew there and the leaves closer to
the ground are more susceptible to
disease and the other reason for pruning
often is you're removing these leaves
that are getting diseased really quickly
and getting them out of there the longer
they sit on there the more likely they
can spread it to another plant or
farther up this plant so some of these
plants I leaned them a little bit too
far so the tomatoes are touching the
ground but I'm gonna cover exactly how
to lower and lean a lot better I've
removed all of these Sun leaves I think
I want to remove okay if reading cluster
I don't see any suckers its fruiting
cluster so far so good
no suckers okay we've got something here
what is that is it a sucker or a Sun
leaf
it is a Sun leaf okay you can see it's
got broad leaves horizontally spaced
leaves nothing going vertical and it's
connected to the fruiting cluster which
on this variety it's almost always a Sun
leaf as we keep moving up we got
something else in the crotch what is it
is it a sucker yes it is a sucker it's a
sucker and a Sun leaf here
okay let's before we remove it let's
look up oh the plant does continue
there's obviously a leader above it
pinch it out okay let's move up okay we
got something else in the crotch we've
got a Sun leaf here this looks like a
sucker let's double check keep going up
the main stem ah flower structure coming
off of a main stem this must be the
leader
so we can remove it okay let's move up
again there's our beautiful fruiting
cluster we've got our son Leif son Leif
son Leif and then
Oh another fruiting cluster which means
and of vertically and a vertical going
up son Leif connected to this other
frilly thing which is the leader there
it is that's the leader thanks for
watching guys I hope you really learned
how to prune those Tomatoes and how to
identify the suckers so that you can
train them to a single leader and have
the most vigorous growth and best fruit
possible so the final step in my tomato
process is to train them on the wire or
the line and then lower and lean them
since I'm doing a lower immune system so
I'm gonna have three videos in total
about tomatoes I've done my one on
planting and fertilizing summer veggies
this video is about pruning and then my
third video will be about training them
up a line or up a trellis or on trellis
netting the different ways that you can
do it and then of course because I'm
doing below and lean system I'm gonna
show you guys how to do lower and lean
as well so stay tuned for that video
coming out soon if that was really
helpful to you guys you wouldn't mind go
check out my patreon page it's a way
that you can support this channel and
help me while I'm creating all of these
videos for free I've spent hundreds and
hundreds of hours and I will continue to
do so I always want you know 95% of all
the content that I'm ever gonna put out
it's gonna be free for everybody and I
always want it to be that way because I
want everyone to be able to access this
information everyone should know how to
grow the best food possible so I want to
make that available to everybody so it
would be a huge support to me and my
family and this farm and my future farm
someday and I even give reward so if you
wanted to ask me personal questions or
get personal advice on your garden or
farm that's something that you could do
very cheaply through patreon anyways
guys I just yeah I'd love your support
and thank you so much for all the great
comments and all the help that you guys
always give me
it's very helpful to me alright guys
thanks again and I'll see you guys in
the next video
have a great week
[Music]